INSTRUCTIONS ON HOW TO INSTALL ambrosia ON A MAC (El Capitan)
 [Instructions for other versions, including Sierra, may require more care.]

BEFORE YOU BEGIN, you need to have the following:
 * The password to your machine.
   This is the same password you use to give permission to install normal
   applications and packages on a Mac.
 * Your Apple ID & Password.
   This is needed because we will have to download additional software from
   Apple.  This software is free, but not typically used, so we need to
   install it under your Apple ID.  Getting an Apple ID is easy and free.
   (It's your iPhone ID & password for new apps, as well.)
 * 10 GigaBytes of space on the hard drive.  You can probably get by with
   less, but I've not tried installing with less.
 * A power cord.
   This procedure will take a while and should not be interrupted.  Keep
   your machine plugged in while you're doing the install.  It will take,
   perhaps, an hour of time.

OVERVIEW
If you're using ambrosia, you're using python.  If you're using python, you're
a programmer.  Programmers need lots of little pieces of software that are
not typically installed on most computers.  What we do here will do the
following (all of which is free):
   *  Install XCode.  These are tool-building programming tools.
      you need to have XCode installed to build other tools (like python3).
   *  Install MacPorts.  This allows you to, from the command line, install
      a diversity of thousands of new languages and systems.  A no-brainer.
   *  Install Python, verion 3.  All modern computers (and many phones and
      tablets) include Python, version 2.  It's good, but not great.  Version
      3 is a modern language that supports the construction of big systems,
      like ambrosia.  Thus, the need for 'python3'.
   *  Install ImageMagick.  A wonderful suite of commandline tools that allow
      you to convert images from one type to another, to create thumbnails,
      stereo views, image compositing, etc.  This is used heavily by sweet
      ambrosia.
   * Install ffmpeg.  A collection of commandline tools that allow
      you to manipulate video formats.  We'll need this for animation.
   * Install POV.  The Persistance of Vision ray tracer is core of the
      technology of converting models to images.  We need this!
   * Install emacs.  I have know idea what you're using for an editor, but
      emacs is the Swiss Army knife of editors, the Land Rover of programming
      tools, the Twinkie of any serious programmer's eye.  Install it & don't
      look back.
   * Install ambrosia.  Written at Williams, you need to bring this in to
      do everything we do in 109.  This is open software, but, for the moment,
      it requires you have access to an account in CS (you do!). Eventually, I
      expect to see this installed in K-12 classrooms so everyone can see
      what this is about.  Interested?  See me.

INSTRUCTIONS.
I am assuming you're using El Capitan (10.11.5+).  (You can determine your
version from the "About This Mac" item under the Apple menu.)  If you don't
have that installed, these instructions will likely work, but you'll need to
be watchful for alternatives to the kits I suggest here.

I. INSTALL XCODE
It's unlikely that you have XCode.  You can check in your Applications.  If you
see XCode (down at the bottom), you can skip at least to step I.C and pick
up from there.

 A. Plug your machine into a good power source.  If you have an ethernet cable,
    using it will significantly improve the speed of downloads.
 B. Go to the AppStore (look under the Apple menu), or type "AppStore" in the
    spotlight search box at the top right of your screen:
  - In the AppStore app, type "XCode" (don't include quotes) in the search box.
  - Near the XCode logo, press "get", then "install app".  It will ask for
    your Apple ID and password; provide them and press "buy" (it *is* free).
  - To monitor the download, you go to the "Store/Purchased" (the item
    "Purchased" in the "Store" menu) and scroll down to the bottom.  You'll
    see the progress bar for XCode.  It will take up 4+ billion bytes of space.
    [6 minutes; your machine may take longer, depending on age, time of day,
     and location]
  - After it has been installed, dismiss the AppStore window.
 C. Add "Terminal" (look in Applications/Utilities) to your dock.  We'll need
    to use this quite a bit.
 D. Open the Terminal window.
  - Type
      xcode-select --install
    This will turn on the coding tools, after you agree to the license.
    Press "install" if asked to install the "commandline developer tools".
    Type "Agree" when asked and hit return.
    [1 minute]
    Press "Done".
  - Type
      sudo xcodebuild -license
    provide the system password when asked ("sudo" means: do something as
    the Super User; it needs a password) and follow instructions to agree.

II. INSTALL MACPORTS
It's unlikely you have this, especially if you didn't have XCode.  Let's
install it.
 A. In a browser, go to
      http://macports.org
    Under "getting started", press "installation".
    Under "Quickstart" press:
      * OS X 10.11 El Capitan
    This downloads a package ending in .pkg to wherever you typically
    download things (perhaps your Downloads folder?).
 B. Double click on the MacPorts-....pkg and follow the instructions to
    install.  You'll need to provide passwords and agree to terms.
    Close the package installer when finished. [1 minute]
 C. Close the Terminal window and re-open it. (Quit, then re-click Terminal)
    - Type
        sudo port -v selfupdate
      This takes 1 minute and should indicate the "port tree has been updated".

III. INSTALL PYTHON3
This is getting good.  You're on a roll!
 A. In the Terminal window, type:
      sudo port install python36
    (Provide your computer's password if asked.)
    [1 minute]
 B. Type
      sudo ln -s /opt/local/bin/python3.6 /opt/local/bin/python3
      sudo ln -s /opt/local/bin/pydoc3.6 /opt/local/bin/pydoc3
    These create shorthands for "python3" and "pydoc3" which use version 3.6.

IV. INSTALL IMAGEMAGICK.
Image whacking tools.  All needed for keeping everything in .png format.
 A. In the Terminal window, type:
      sudo port install ImageMagick
    Note the unusual spelling.

    This installs a number of items useful to manipulating images.
    The title of your window will flicker: cool.
    [9 minutes]

V. INSTALL FFMPEG.
These are video whacking tools.  We'll be making movies.
 A. In the Terminal window, type:
      sudo port install ffmpeg
    [8 minutes]

VI. INSTALL POV.
This is the ray tracer (wouldn't that be a great pen name?!).
 A. Yup, in the Terminal window, type:
      sudo port install povray
    [5 minutes]

VII. INSTALL EMACS.
 A. In the Terminal, type:
      sudo port install emacs
    This will install emacs, version 24, in case you don't have emacs already.
    [3 minutes?]
    
VIII. INSTALL ambrosia
This section requires considerable care.  Please read the instructions
very carefully, double check commands you type, and contact me if you have
problems.
 A. We're going to get a copy of ambrosia which you will install in a
    folder in your home directory, called 'ambrosia'.  Here, we collect
    a copy of the ambrosia system using your Computer Science user name
    and password.
    In the terminal window, type the following command, replacing 18xyz
    with your CS username:
      git clone ssh://18xyz@fuji.cs.williams.edu/Volumes/Courses/cs109/ambrosia ~/ambrosia
    You will be asked for your CS password.  Provide it.
    This will take less than a minute, and will create the 'ambrosia' folder.
    Please don't move this, or the system will not work.
 B. Now, we'll copy the '109' command into the system.  Here, you may be
    asked for local system password:
      sudo cp ~/ambrosia/scripts/109 /opt/local/bin
 C. Make sure the command is working:
      hash -r
      source 109
    This shoudl give you the familiar message:
      You're set up for 109.
    Indeed, you are!
